[Music]
I've worked on a film called Apollo 13
and when I worked on this film I
discovered something about how our
brains work and how our brains work is
that when we're sort of infused with
either enthusiasm or awe or fondness or
whatever it changes in alters our
perception of things the change is what
we see changes what we remember and as
an experiment because I
dauntingly create a task for myself of
recreating saturn v launch for this
particular movie because I put it out
there I felt a little nervous about it
so I need to do an experiment and bring
a group of people like this in a
projection room and plays the stock
footage and when I played the stock
footage I was simply wanted to find out
what people remembered what was memoral
about it
what should I actually try to replicate
what should I try to emulate some degree
so this is the footage that I was
showing everybody and what I discovered
is because of the nature of the footage
and the fact that we were doing this
film there was an emotion that was built
into it and our collective memories of
what what this launch meant to us and
all these various things when I showed
it and I asked immediately after the
screening was over what they thought of
it
what was your memorable shots and they
changed them they were had camera moves
on them they had all kinds of things
shots were combined and I was just
really curious I mean what the hell were
you looking at just a few minutes ago
and how come and how'd you come up with
this sort of description and what I
discovered is what I should do is not
actually replicate what they saw is
replicate what they remembered so this
is our footage of the of the launch
based on basically taking notes asking
people what they thought and then the
combination of all the different shots
and all the different things put
together create their sort of collective
consciousness of what they remembered it
looked like but not what it really
looked like so this is what we created
for Apollo 13
so literally what you're seeing now is
the confluence of a bunch of different
people a bunch of different memories
including my own of taking a little bit
of liberty with the subject matter I
basically shot everything with short
lenses which means that you're very
close to the action
but framed it's very similar to the long
lens shots which gives you a sense of
distance so ice basically was setting up
something that would remind you of
something you haven't really quite seen
before
and then I'm gonna show you exactly what
it is that you were reacting to when
you're reacting to it
[Music]
[Applause]
and pretend they're clapping for me
so now what I'm in a parking lot I've
basically it's a tin can and I'm
basically recreating the launch with
fire extinguishers fire that I have wax
that I threw in front of the lens to
look like ice and so basically if you
believed any of the stuff that I just
showed you what you were reacting to
what your remoting to is something
that's a total falsehood and I found
that really kind of fascinating and in
this particular case this is the climax
of the movie and you know the way to
achieving it was simply take a model
throat out of a helicopter and shoot it
and that's simply what I did that's me
shooting and I'm a fairly mediocre
operator so I got that nice sense of
verisimilitude of kind of you know
following the rocket all the way down
and giving that little sort of edges
desperately trying to keep it all in
frame so then I come up to the next
thing we had a NASA consultant who was
actually an astronaut who was actually
on some of the missions of Apollo 15 and
he was there to basically double-check
my science and I guess somebody thought
they needed to do that I don't know why
but they thought they did so we were
we're you know he's a he's a hero he's
an astronaut and we're all sort of
excited and you know I gave myself the
liberty of saying you know some of the
shots I did didn't really suck that bad
and so maybe maybe you know I was
feeling kind of good about it so I had
brought him in here and you need to
really a check and see what we were
doing and basically give us our a-plus
report card and so I showed him some
charts we were working on and waiting
for the reaction that you hope for which
is what I got
so I showed him these two shots and then
he basically told me what he thought
okay
it's what you dream about so what I got
from him is he turned to me and said you
would never ever design a rocket like
that you would never have a rocket go up
all the gantt your arms are going out
you imagine the tragedy that could
possibly happen with that you would
never ever design a rocket like that and
he was looking at me it's like yeah I
don't know if you noticed but I'm the
guy out in the parking lot recreating
one of America's finest moments with
fire extinguishers already and and I'm
not gonna argue with you you're an
astronaut a hero and I'm from New Jersey
so I'm just gonna show you some footage
I'm just going to show you some footage
and tell me what you think and then I
did kind of get the reaction I was
hoping for so I showed him this and this
is actual footage that he was on this is
Apollo 15 this was his mission so I I
showed him this and the reaction I got
was interesting so and what happened was
I mean I what I sort of in tuned and
that is that he remembered it
differently he remembered that was a
perfectly safe sort of gantry system
perfectly safe rocket launch because
he's sitting in a rocket that has like a
hundred thousand pounds of thrust built
by the lowest bidder he was hoping it
was going to work out okay
so he twisted his memory around now Ron
Howard ran into Buzz Aldrin who was not
on the movie so he had he had no idea
that we were faking any of this footage
and he just responded as he would
respond and I'll run this Buzz Aldrin
came up to me and said hey not launch
footage I saw some shots I'd never seen
before
did you guys did what vault did you find
that stuff in and I said well no vault
buzz we you know we generated all that
from scratch
and he said wow that's pretty good can
we use it I think he's a great American
so Titanic was a if you don't know the
story doesn't end well Jim Cameron
actually photographed the real Titanic
so he basically set up or basically
shattered the suspension of disbelief
because what he photographed was the
real thing a mere sub going down or
actually two Mir subs going down to the
real wreck and he created this very
haunting footages it's really beautiful
and it conjures up all these at various
different emotions but he couldn't
photograph everything and to tell the
story I had to fill in the gaps which is
now rather daunting because now I have
to recreate back-to-back what really
happened and I had to you know I'm the
only one who could really blow it at
that point so this is the footage he
photographed and it was pretty moving
and pretty awe-inspiring so I'm gonna
just let it let it run so you kind of
absorb this sort of thing and I'll
describe my sort of reactions when I was
looking at it for the very first time I
got the feeling that I my brain wanted
to basically see it come back to life I
automatically wanted to see this this
ship this magnificent ship basically in
all its glory and conversely I want to
see it not in all its glory basically go
back to what what it looks like so I
conjured up an effect that I'll be later
going to show you what I try to do which
is kind of the heart of the movie for me
and so that's why I wanted to do the
movie that's why I wanted to create
these sort of things I created and I'll
show you you know another thing that I
found interesting is what we really were
remoting to when you see when you take a
look at it so here's the behind the
scenes a couple little shots here so
when you saw my footage you were seeing
this basically a bunch of guys flipping
a ship upside down and the little mir
subs are actually about the size of
small footballs and shot and smoke Jim
went three miles down and I went about
three miles away from the studio and
photographed this in a garage
and so but what your remoting to or what
you're looking at had the same feeling
the same haunting quality that Jim's
footage had so I found it so fascinating
that our brains sort of once you believe
something's real you transfer everything
that you feel about it this this quality
you have and it's totally artificial
it's totally make-believe yet it's not
to you and I found that that was a very
interesting thing to explore and use and
it caused me to create the next effect
that I'll show you which is this sort of
magic transition and all I was really
attempting to do is basically have the
audience cue the effect so it became a
seamless experience for them that I
wasn't showing you my sort of
interpretation I was showing what you
wanted to see and the very next shot
right after this
so you can see what I was doing it so
basically if there's two subs in the
same shot I shot it because where's the
camera coming from and when Jim shot it
was only one sub because he was
photographed from another and I don't
remember if I did this or Jim did this
I'll give it to Jim cuz he could use the
pat on the back okay so now the Titanic
transition so this is what I was
referring to where I wanted to basically
magically transplant from one state of
the Titanic to the other
so I'll just play the shot once
and while I was hoping for is it just
melts in front of you
that was the last time Titanic ever saw
daylight so um what I did is basically
had another screening room experience
where I was basically tracking where I
was looking or where we were looking and
of course you're looking at the two
people on the on the bow of the ship and
then at some point I'm changing the
periphery of the shot I'm changing it's
becoming the rest a trek and then I
would run it every day and then I would
find exactly the moment that I stopped
looking at them and start noticing the
rest of it and the moment my eye shifted
we just marked it to the frame the
moment my eye shifted I immediately
started to change them so now somehow
you missed where it started and where it
stopped and so I'll just show it one
more time and is literally done by using
what our brains naturally do for us
which is which is as soon as you shift
your attention something changes then I
left the little scarf going because it
really wanted to be a ghostly shot
really wanted to feel like they were
still on the wreck essentially that's
where they were buried forever or
something like that I just made that up
as incidentally last time I ever saw
daylight Ozar long film to work on now
you go is another interesting movie
because the movie itself is about film
illusions is about how our brain is
tricked into seeing a persistence of
vision that creates a motion picture and
one of the things that I had to do is we
Sacha Baron Cohen is very clever very
smart guy
comedian wanted to basically do an
homage to that kind of the Buster Keaton
sort of slapstick things and he wanted
his leg brace to get caught on a moving
train very dangerous very impossible to
do and particularly on our stage because
there literally is no way to actually
move this train because it's it fits so
snuggling into our set so let me show
you the scene and then I basically used
the trick that was identified by Sergei
Eisenstein which is if you have a camera
that's moving with a moving object what
is not moving appears to be moving at
what is moving appears to be stopped so
what you're actually seeing now is the
train is not moving at all
and what is actually moving is the floor
so this is the shots the low that's a
little video of what you're looking at
there which is our little test so that's
actually what you're seeing and I
thought it was sort of an interesting
thing because it was part of the homage
of the of the movie itself is is coming
up with this sort of genius trick which
I can't take credit for I'd love to but
I can't because it was invented like in
1910 or something like that is I told
Marty and it's kind of one of those mind
things that it's really hard to really
get until you actually see at work and I
said you know what I was gonna do and he
said so let me see if I get it straight
the thing with the wheels that doesn't
move
and the thing without the wheels that
moves precisely
brings me to the next and final Marty's
not gonna see this is he this isn't
viewed outside of the next illustration
is something that there is a like all
one shot theory it's a very elegant way
of telling a story especially if you're
following somebody on a journey and that
journey basically tells something about
their personality in a very concise way
and what we wanted to do based on the
shot and Goodfellas is join the great
shots ever at the Martin Scorsese film
of basically following Henry Hill
through what it feels like to be a
gangster walk going through the
Copacabana being treated in a special
way he was the master of his of his
universe and we want it you go to feel
the same way so we created this shot
[Music]
and we felt that if we could basically
move the camera with him we would feel
what it feels like to be this boy who is
basically the master of his universe and
his universe is the you know behind the
scenes in the bowels of this particular
train station and only he can actually
navigate through and do it this way and
we had to make him feel that this is his
normal everyday sort of life so the idea
of doing it as one shot was very
important and of course in shooting in
3d which is basically it's a huge camera
that's hanging off of a giant stick so
to recreate a Steadicam shot was that
was the task and make it feel kind of
like what the reaction got when you saw
the Goodfellow shown so what you're now
gonna see is how we actually did it it's
actually five separate sets shot at five
different times for two different boys
the one on the left is where the shot
ends and that were shot on the right is
where it takes takes over and now we
switch boy so it went from ASA
Butterfield who's the star of the show
to his standin I wouldn't say it's stunt
double there's a crazy rig that we built
for this and so this is and now this is
a set number three were into and then
we're gonna go into the basically the
very last moment of the shot is is
actually the Steadicam shot everything
else was shot on cranes and various
things like that and it literally was
done over five different sets two
different boys different times and it
all had to feel like was all one shot
and what was sort of great for me was it
was probably the best reviewed shot I've
ever worked on and you know I was kind
of proud of it when I was done which is
which was he should ever really be proud
of stuff I guess so I was kind of proud
of it I went to a friend of mine and
said you know this is
you know kind of the best reviewed shot
ever worked on what do you think was the
reason and he said because no one knows
you had anything to do with it so all I
can say is thank you and that's my
presentation for you
[Music]
[Applause]